<h1>Collection Strengths and Areas of Specialization</h1>
<p>The Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center collections demonstrate significant strengths in the following areas: 
<ul>
<li><h2>Institute for Advanced Study Administration and Community History</h2> 
<p>The Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center strives to document the enduring impact of the Institute as an intellectual home and refuge for scholars across the globe. The Archives Center collects both a robust body of institutional records and a growing body of documentation that reflects the unique and diverse communities at the center of campus life.</p>
<p>Touchstone collections in this area include the Board of Trustees records, the Director’s Office records, and Faculty minutes. Together these records provide a unique perspective on the administrative histories of the Institute’s Trustees, Faculty, Members, Visitors, workers, and supporters. These anchor collections offer particularly keen insight into the Institute’s history, including significantly the Institute’s role in supporting scholars during global conflict.</p>
<p>The Archives Center additionally provides an intimate portrait of the academic and scholarly advancement made possible by bringing a diverse body of scholars into community. The Oral History Project records and the Louise Morse scrapbooks represent touchstone collections for the area of campus life. These two collections depict the key role that friendship, collegiality, and intimacy play in the development of advanced research.</p></li>

</li><h2>Mathematics and Computing</h2>
<p>Since its foundation in 1930, the Institute has served as an Institutional home for 35 Nobel Prize laureates and 42 Fields Medalists. Among our many distinguished Faculty, the Institute community is extremely proud to have included some of the greatest mathematicians and mathematical discoveries of the past century. The Archives Center’s collections provide a significant record of these achievements from the mid-twentieth century onwards.</p> 

<p>Among the touchstones included in our collections are the records of the Electronic Computer Project, which document Institute Faculty John von Neumann’s groundbreaking development of the “IAS Machine,” the first computer to leverage high-speed random-access storage matrix technologies and the template for nearly all modern computing. The records include meteorological and arithmetic logs that reveal the role of advanced computing in the development of a host of academic disciplines as far reaching as mathematics. engineering, and climatology. Simultaneously, ECP contracts with the Atomic Energy Commission and Ballistics Laboratories provide generous support for researchers seeking to understand the material effects of advanced computing as an integral part of the cultural, political, and social landscape of the modern and post-modern eras.</p>
 
<p>Other anchor collections in this area include the Institute’s collection of Albert Einstein ephemera as well as the Kurt Gödel papers. The Einstein ephemera is an important celebration of one of the Institute’s most beloved and celebrated Faculty. Our holdings include art and artifacts from Einstein’s Princeton home as well as several records detailing the Institute’s role in helping to shield the Jewish scientist from the Nazi Party in World War II. The Kurt Gödel papers, on the other hand, include the unpublished writings of one of Einstein’s closest acquaintances within the Institute community and one of the greatest mathematical logicians of the twentieth century.</p></li> 
 
</li><h2>Historical Studies</h2>
<p>The Archives Center collections demonstrate additional strength in their representation of the significant areas of research in the historical studies. Our holdings reflect the strides made by key Faculty at the Institute for Advanced Study in fields as far ranging as: Islamic studies, Medieval and Modern European studies, Near and East Asian studies, and Classical studies as well as philosophy and international relations more broadly.</p>

<p>Touchstone collections in this area demonstrate a particular strength in Islamic studies, Near Eastern studies, and ancient history as demonstrated in the Patricia Crone papers, Oleg Grabar papers, and Otto Neugebauer papers. Patricia Crone and Oleg Grabar’s papers in particular reveal the evolving history of scholarly approaches to Islamic studies over the course of the twentieth century from both archeological and historical perspectives. The Otto Neugebauer papers additionally offer a unique glimpse into the scholarly interchange at the heart of the Institute for Advanced Study where Neugebauer studied across different disciplines. His papers provide a particular emphasis on his work on astronomical cuneiform texts.</p>

<p>The collections in this area depict the evolution of historical studies across a variety of disciplinary approaches, from theoretical work to archeological and material-based historiography.</p></li>

</li><h2>Natural Sciences</h2>
<p>In a little over 50 years since its establishment in 1965, the Institute’s School of Natural Sciences has become a significant center for research in far ranging areas of the life and physical sciences. Our faculty have made key developments in: astrophysics, biology, mathematical physics, quantum field theory, particle phenomenology, string theory, quantum gravity, and, most recently, systems biology. The Institute records reflect a history of fostering scholarship at the frontier of these disciplines, including records related to key Faculty who preceded the School itself such as Niels Bohr, Paul Dirac, and Isidore I. Rabi, among others.</p>
<p>In addition to the Institute’s own records, the Archives Center’s special collections provide a particular strength in the growth and development of astrophysics in the 20th century. The John N. Bahcall papers provide insight into the development of the field of astrophysics with an emphasis on Bahcall’s work on the solar neutrino problem and the development of the Hubble Telescope in collaboration with Lyman Spitzer from the 1970s through to the 1990s. The Bahcall papers are complemented by the Scott Tremaine papers and the Stephen L. Adler papers which demonstrate the reach of the Institute’s scholars from astrophysics to elementary particles and quantum field theory.</p></li>
</li><h2>Social Sciences</h2>
<p>Founded in 1973, the Institute’s School of Social Science approaches a critical examination of societies and social change from a diverse array of academic disciplines, including economics, law, psychology, sociology, anthropology, philosophy, and literature. While the youngest historically of the Institute’s four Schools, the School of Social Sciences includes such distinguished Faculty as Didier Fassin, Clifford Geertz, Alondra Nelson, Michael Walzer, and Joan Wallach Scott, among others. The School of Social Science’s programming reveals the School’s commitment to critical approaches to: anthropology, global economies and economics in times of social crisis, ethnographies of policing and public ethnography, law and legal theory, political theory and public policy, and, more broadly, philosophies and literatures engaged in interpretive social sciences. The Archives Center strives to mirror and represent the significant impact of the School of Social Sciences dedication to promoting social change through scholarship and research.</p>

<p>Our touchstone collection in this area is the Clifford Geertz papers. The Clifford Geertz papers reveal the long history of Geertz as the first and founding faculty member for the School of Social Sciences. The papers document Geertz’s effort to realize the School of Social Sciences as an interdisciplinary home for interpretive social sciences between 1970 through 2006. This collection provides an important foundation for understanding the historic work and legacy of social sciences at the Institute for Advanced Study.</p></li>
