<h1>Arrangement and Description Workflows: Establishing an Arrangement</h1>
<p>After completing the project plan, the archivist should be ready to physically establish the collection’s arrangement as proposed. Archivists that propose the collection remain in its original order will only need to record the collection’s current arrangement using an ArchivesSpace compatible inventory template. On the other hand, archivists that propose imposing an outside arrangement will need to first identify the intellectual organization of the collection and optionally physically rearrange the collection before recording the new arrangement via the ArchivesSpace compatible inventory template.</p>
 
<p>A general rule of experienced archival arrangers is to intervene in a collection’s original order as little as possible (this rule is as a core principle of archival processing frequently referred to by theorists using the term respect des fonds). Even in cases where archivists must impose an order to make a collection intelligible as a unit, experienced archivists often recommend that archivists re-arranging material only work at one level of accessibility at a time. Unexperienced archivist often attempt to bring a collection from collection-level accessibility all the way to item-level accessibility in one round of processing, but this is often regarded as an ineffective strategy. Instead, a general rule is to work across one level of intellectual unit at a time (e.g., from collection-level to series-level, series-level to folder-level, folder-level to item-level) in iterative processing projects that take place over several years.</p>
<h2>Collection-Level Arrangements</h2> 
<p>All materials that enter this repository are minimally managed at the collection-level. A collection-level arrangement groups all materials within the archive that share a distinct provenance (and/or creator) into a single access point for users via a collection-level finding aid. Collections include all accessions or accruals of materials with the same provenance and belonging to the same body of documentation (i.e., the same group of records, the same fonds, etc.).</p>  

<p>The materials within the collection will all receive a shared “collection number” or “identifier” to mark them as part of a single unit. Individual accession records will not be deleted or destroyed, but the materials within those accessions will be incorporated and described together as one unit in the finding aid. At this level, physical control is maintained by giving each new box of materials a sequential box number that represents its place in the total collection.</p>    
<p>If a collection’s creator and/or donor provides an inventory, that inventory will be used as the basis to access the collection in its original order and reproduced in the collection’s finding aid. If no inventory exists, users will need to rely on box numbers in the finding aids container listing to navigate the collection. For this reason, this level of arrangement will be ideal for small collections (for which users might just request the entire collection easily), unprocessed collections with multiple accruals, and collections with low use.</p>    

<h2>Series-Level Arrangements</h2> 
<p>For collections, or parts of collections, which require a more detailed level of control for retrieval and use, archivists may choose to impose a series-level arrangement. The SAA defines a series as, “A group of similar records that are arranged according to a filing   system and that are related as the result of being created, received, or used in the same activity.”46 Series are intellectual groupings that archivists use to arrange materials according to their creation, use, function, and, often, format.</p>    
<p>Often in our repository, the series-level of arrangement will be seen in use for processed collections that contain unprocessed additions or accruals. Rather than re-filing all new materials immediately into highly processed and arranged collections, all accruals will first be placed in an “Additions” series by the Accessioning Archivist. This ensures that users can access materials, reference staff can retrieve materials, and that Collection Services team members can prioritize when new materials are filed in an efficient way.</p>    
<p>In the finding aid, all series will appear in the container listing and in an arrangement note for users. Individual series will include scope and content notes that explain to users how archivists have intervened in the arrangement of materials and each series will be linked to the physical containers that include parts of the series to aid retrieval.  
<p>Materials in a series may appear to be either intellectually arranged (meaning that they are only identified intellectually in a finding aid as being part of the group) or both intellectually and physically arranged (meaning that they are both intellectually identified as a group and physically rehoused to be in the same containers). Both methods are acceptable, though intellectual arrangement is preferable because it requires less effort for a similar effect.</p>  

<p>New archivists sometimes struggle when first learning to create series; however, experienced archivists often have a clearer sense of the kinds of distinctions which make for successful series. The most successful series often divide collections along the lines of provenance and function rather than thematic subjects. A successful series level arrangement will allow for the easy addition of accruals or additions into a collection. Series that define material by provenance allow archivists to easily add materials from later additions into pre-existing arrangements (e.g., in a collection of organizational records it should be easy to place materials created by the Marketing Department into one series and materials created by the Education Department into another).</p>    
<p>Series that divide materials along subject lines are often problematic for later accruals (e.g., if the organization’s records are instead arranged by the subjects of “Educational Materials” and “Publications,” archivists might have trouble incorporating a magazine created by the marketing department to advertise to educational services into  the collection because technically it fits under the subjects of both series). For this reason, all series-level arrangements are first proposed in the processing plan and then approved by a group of reviewers before implementation.</p>  
<p>For any archivists struggling with series creation, the following list of common series titles provides some frequently used examples to consider:</p>
<ul>
  <li>Articles,</li> 
  <li>Administrative records,</li>
  <li>Audiovisual materials,</li> 
  <li>Awards,</li>  
  <li>Business records,</li>  
  <li>Conference records,</li>  
  <li>Correspondence,</li>  
  <li>Faculty files,</li> 
  <li>Financial reports,</li>  
  <li>Legal records,</li>  
  <li>Meeting minutes,</li>  
  <li>Personal papers,</li>  
  <li>Personnel files,</li>  
  <li>Photographs,</li>  
  <li>Publications,</li>  
  <li>Research,</li>  
  <li>Subject files, and</li>  
  <li>Writing.</li>
  </ul>
 
<h2>Subseries-Level Arrangements</h2>
<p>Series may contain sub-series which impose further distinctions on materials already arranged into subseries. This additional level of arrangement is often only necessary for the largest and most complex of organizational records and should not be a regularly or excessively used arrangement strategy in this repository (except in the cases of the largest collections including university archives and United Mine Workers, for example).</p>  
<h2>File-Level Arrangements</h2> 
<p>While most collections will be served adequately using series-level arrangements, some collections with high use, sensitive topics, or detailed donor inventories may be arranged at the file-level. Collections may be arranged directly at the file-level or may be placed first into a series order and then arranged individually by files.</p>  
<p>A file level order requires that all files have meaningful and useful titles. Whenever possible, archivists should retain the file titles included by the collection’s creator. However, if creator provided titles are incorrect, misleading, or non-existent, archivists will be required to title folders before providing an arrangement or order for all folders to appear.</p>  
<p>When titling folders, archivists should provide titles that detail the creator, function, format, and frequency of the materials within. Folder titles should include inclusive dates that provide key information about the range of dates when the material within the folder was created. Once all folders are titled, archivists should arrange folders in a schema that can be easily described to users in a finding aid and easily maintained if several new accruals of material appear in the collection. For example, archivists may consider arranging folders alphabetically, chronologically, or in their original order.</p>  
<p>Collections arranged at the file-level require archivists create a container listing of all files and their corresponding boxes for users in the finding aid. Archivists that use this arrangement will need to complete an arrangement note that describes to users how the materials have been arranged as well as information about any files that have been re-titled in a processing note to make this intervention clear to users. 
<h2>Item-Level Arrangements</h2> 
<p>In extremely rare cases, archivists may need to arrange collections at the item-level. In this level, individual items (usually within folders) will receive a title and be arranged according a schema of the archivist’s choice. This level of arrangement will be extremely laborious and will require the archivists to title individual items within a collection. Because of the intensive labor associated with this level of arrangement, this level will very rarely be used across entire collections within this repository.</p>  
<p>Item titles should often be derived straight from the item itself, but, in cases where no existing title is provided, archivists will have to create titles. Item titles, like folder titles, should include key details about the creator, function, and format of the item, as well as the date of creation. A successful item title may be “Annual Report from the Offices of Human Services, 1957.” Notice that this includes the creator, format, and date for the material.  This helps to give the user a clear sense of the context.</p> 
 
<p>Collections arranged at the item-level will require archivists to include a list of item titles in a container listing for the finding aid. Archivists will need to include key information about where they have intervened on individual titles in the processing information note, and include arrangement notes that describe how items are arranged either uniformly across the collection or within each individual file or series grouping. Again, the high intensity of the arrangement requires a matching level of commitment for archivists when physically processing and describing the collection. This intense level of labor means that it will often be not only unnecessary to process collections in this detail but undesirable as well.</p>  
