<h1>Collection History</h1>
<p>The Institute for Advanced Study Board of Trustees and then Director J. Robert Oppenheimer commissioned the first history of the Institute for Advanced Study. At the time, the Institute found itself in the midst of foundational changes. In 1939, the Institute’s Founding Director, Abraham Flexner, stepped down from his role at the center of the Institute life. Only five years later in 1944, the Institute Founders Louis Bamberger and Caroline Bamberger Fuld passed away. A generational shift took place again in 1947 as a relatively young physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer replaced Institute Director Frank Aydelotte, originally one of the first Trustees for the Institute. In the midst of this change, the Institute hired Beatrice Stern, a noted corporate historian, to begin to assemble an official history beginning with the Institute’s foundation in 1930.</p> 

<p>Stern spent several years interviewing key figures in Institute history and uncovering a significant body of research that would become the basis of her 700-page manuscript The Institute for Advanced Study, 1930-1950. Over the course of Stern’s work, she captured the lives of a generation as it passed. Her research materials included the administrative records and correspondence of administrators and Faculty alike. The timeliness of Stern’s work could not be understated. She remained on campus to witness the death of one of the most beloved members of the Founding Faculty, Albert Einstein, in 1955. Stern remained working as Einstein’s material belongings and home transferred into Institute custody, unaware that eventually her own work would feature along Einstein’s as the two gifts which comprise the basis of special collecting at the Institute. Throughout the next thirty years, Institute Librarians stewarded and safeguarded Stern’s collection of Institute records alongside individual Faculty collections providing access to researchers on a case-by-case basis.</p> 

<p>In the late 1970s, Institute librarians began to grow concerned about the Library’s ability to steward the collections to the best standard of care as the Historical Science-Social Studies Library faced increasing pressures around collection space. Under the guidance of Librarian Elliot Shore, the Institute commissioned the National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC) to survey the holdings and make recommendations on the best way to care for the collection. The NHPRC affirmed the historic significance of the Institute’s holdings and that year the Institute began work on a formal Archival Policy.</p> 

<p>In October 1986, the Institute Board of Trustees approved the “Archival Policy” which established the Institute’s archives. In the years that followed, the Institute continued to collect its official records and sought to help place the papers of Faculty at outside Institutions. During Peter Goddard’s tenure as Director, Institute Trustee Shelby White helped to transform this policy in 2007 with the generous support of the Leon Levy Foundation. With White’s support, the Institute began a major effort to create the space and environmental conditions needed to commit for the first time to retaining not only the Institute’s records but, in a much broader sense, to collecting the history of Institute Faculty.</p> 

<p>The Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center opened in 2009 and the Institute hired its first professional archivist. Shortly thereafter, the Executive Officers of all four Schools approved the first Collection Development Policy to include a mandate to collect Institute records as well as Faculty papers in order to make them publicly accessible in the Institute’s new Archives Center. 

<p>Today, the Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center continues in this central work to cultivate an increasingly expansive sense of the Institute’s history. In this Collection Development Policy, the Archives Center outlines steps for the continued growth of both our collections and our connections to the community that sustains them. 
