<h1>Accessioning Workflows: Stabilizing Archival Materials</h1>

<p>After an initial survey of materials, archivists should address the conservation needs of the incoming materials. Accessioning archivists often refer to this process as “stabilization” rather than “preservation” or “conservation” in order to express that the objective is not to fully restore material to the perceived “ideal” condition but rather to address any immediate issues and prepare the materials to be stored until a professional conservator can make an appraisal.</p> 

<p>The accessioning archivist is often looking for three very specific preservation conditions which may compromise materials in the short-term: pests, active molds, and/or water damage. Either of these three conditions can not only compromise a new acquisition but all of the surrounding collections within a library. In these cases, an archivist should immediately separate the affected materials by placing them in air tight containers (or wrapping boxed materials in plastic bags) to be isolated and reviewed away from the rest of holdings. The materials should remain segregated until a professional preservation specialist or a senior archivist can appraise the materials to determine whether they should be maintained as a part of the collection and/or send them for treatment off-site.</p>

<p>Outside of these three immediate needs, accessioning archivist will establish complete routine “holdings maintenance” activities that prepare materials for storage in the controlled preservation environment of the Archives Center. This includes storing all materials in archival quality containers, including acid-free boxes and folders using archival supplies found in the Archives Center.</p>
